Hello and welcome to my lecture on the mini Django web server. So why did I
build this mini Django web server? Well, the first part of my Django for everybody
course is always about getting students to understand the nature of Django. If you
know how to use Django and you know how it works internally, it's easy to write
web applications because Django takes care of all the details of hypertext
transfer protocol, HTTP. And you can read documents, tons of documents, hundreds and
thousands of pages, and write your own Python code to handle the HTTP. The
problem though is, while Django makes it so you don't have to read any of that, you
do have to understand Django. And Django, to give you the kind of flexibility that
you need, uses a very object-oriented inversion of control, a whole bunch of
design patterns that make it so you don't have to write the whole
application, but you need to plug your work into Django. So it's important for
you to understand what the framework is and how it is that your work fits into
it. So mini Django is the simplest possible Django that I could write. It's
under 200 lines. The mini Django framework itself is only 200 lines of
Python, meaning you can read it, you can understand it, and you can even change it
and explore supporting additional features of HTTP. So we're gonna build
both have a mini Django and a really simple Django-like application. So why do
we use Django in the first place? Like I said, do you really want to read RFC 7231?
It is pages that's over a hundred pages and it's detail upon detail upon detail.
If you start reading it, you will realize it's really well-defined how browsers and
web servers talk, but you really don't want to read it, especially when someone
else has written all the code. And all you have to do is import HTTP request and
response from Django.http and then write a four-line function that takes as its
input an HTTP request and returns an HTTP response. And then in your code you
create the HTTP response and put some text in it and you return it and then
Django literally outside of your code does everything else. So Django takes this
super complex task and hides it behind an abstraction. It's something, an
abstraction is something you're sort of not supposed to look past. You're
supposed to just look at the interface that it gives to you and you're supposed
to express your logic and then plug it in at the right place to create a rich
and HTTP compliant web application. Django handles all the details and there's
lots of them, thousands and thousands of little detail. But with all abstractions
it's a good idea to understand the shape of the abstraction that you're dealing
with so you can kind of have some predictability as to when you make a
change to your code. How is that? And then Django says do this, override this
method, override the query method, all that stuff. You have to
kind of understand what's going on behind the scenes. And so my hope is is
that if you can understand mini Django you'll better have a chance, it'll have a
much better chance of understanding the real Django. So in my class I use this
thing I call the big picture and on the left side is a browser with a document
object model that deals with HTML and CSS and JavaScript and intercept user
actions and then sends the request-response cycle into a server
running somewhere on the internet. There's Django and Linux and there's
urls.py and views.py and forms.py and templates.py and literally the
first half of any Django class I teach really is designed to understand this
picture and it's a little complex. So what I like to do is I'd like to take
mini Django which I've written and the HTTP server part of mini Django is under
a hundred lines of code, meaning you can look at it. It's a web server that
responds to a request and sends back a response and then we have pseudo
application code, the urls.py which handles the routing activity, chooses the
right view and then sends the request to the right view, gets a response back from
that view and then urls.py forwards that back to HTTP server which then formats
it in the right way for the network protocol and sends it back to the
browser. And if you look at how Django itself works it's just a more flexible
and more rich and more intricate version of this little thing that I call mini
Django. So if you check out mini Django you'll see that it really is just four
files and some documentation. The run server.py loads the mini Django library
and loads the path router and urls.py and starts the HTTP server. There
always has to be a process listening on the port to accept the connections. The
web server is the library, the framework, it is Django. It's just tiny so I call it
mini Django. It listens for incoming service requests in a Linux process or
a Windows process. Then when it gets a request it parses the network
protocol part of that request. Then when it's got it right it passes the request
to urls.yoururls.py for routing between the views. Then the view produces
the HTTP response object and then urls.py sends that back to the HTTP server
and then it sends it back to the browser when the HTTP server sends it
back to the browser using the HTTP protocol correctly. The urls.py, much
like any Django applications urls.py, it looks at a path and their HTTP request
object and then chooses a view function. And views.py is a set of functions that
capture the functionality of your web application. Each function takes an HTTP
request as its input and produces an HTTP response for the output. So to get
started you can download the source code from GitHub into a folder using either
get or zip. GitHub, if you look at the code button in GitHub, it gives you an
option to download a zip which means you don't have to install git and you don't
have to do a get checkout. And then you can just file the readme instructions.
If you have Python installed on your computer you say Python runserver.py
and then you navigate to the localhost colon 9000 in your browsers and you're
interacting with this little server that's running on a process on your
computer. Taking a look at the source code the views.py looks a lot like
Django's views.py, at least in the beginning in the simplest views, where
each view is a function takes as its first parameter a variable, I call it req
in this situation, of type HTTP request and is expected to return an HTTP
response. So if you look at it it creates the HTTP response object. Again the
definition of HTTP response came from Minijango and the res.headers allows us
to set headers then res.write creates the body of the response and then we
return that response which then we turn back over to Minijango to send back. The
urls.py in Minijango looks a little bit different than the urls.py in a
real Django application because I didn't want to create, if you look at the
urls.py in a real application, it's really a table of routes and I just made
it an if then else so that you can see it's not that different than what the
table of routes really is and you might decide in your mind that this is a
little cleaner and elegant. The purpose of urls.py in Django and in Minijango is
to look at the path and choose a view and then cause that view to be executed
and you see at the end if it can't find a view it sends back a failure view with
a 404 not found. So up next we're going to do a simple demo of downloading
installing and running Minijango. So here's the demonstration of Minijango
for my Django for everybody class. We've got to start by going into GitHub and
taking a look at my Minijango repository. You see github.com/csev/mini_jango
is where we find the code and in here we have a readme and then four source
files and this readme tells us where we're going to do we're going to start
by downloading this code and then running it and we'll go go through this
in a bit. So there are two ways that you can install this if you have git find
some folder do a git clone and grab Minijango if you don't want to install
git or you don't know how to use git you can just grab a zip file because
github is really nice and that's how we're going to do it under this code
button there's a thing called download zip and so that's just going to download
it and it just downloaded it into my downloads folder so I'm going to click
and see here's my downloads folder and on Windows it's a little trickier when
you go into your downloads folder it hides this dot zip the Mac is pretty
easy I think on on the Windows you kind of to right click and extract it but on
Mac you just double click it and it extracts it into real files so now we
see the actual files and so these files Minijango readme run server they're all
the same files that work you got on github is so now you're kind of done
with with github okay so there's the downloads file and now I'm going to
start a terminal and in Windows this is like a command shell in Windows you
would type CD to see the current working directory and in Mac and Linux you say
PWD to see the current working directory and my downloads are just in a
subfolder underneath my home directory users CSEV and if I do an LS - L you'll
see that I've got that zip file it was downloaded and then a folder folder with
Minijango main so I'm gonna go into Minijango - main and so now if you look
at the working directory you see them in my downloads folder I'm in
Minijango dot main and as a matter of fact if I do an LS - L in this folder you
see I see you see the exact same files that you see here in downloads and so
I'm gonna minimize that for now and away you go and so if we go back to the
readme now it says Python run server dot py so I'm gonna copy that and so what
this does is it starts the Minijango server if this was Django on your
laptop you'd say Python manage py run server if this was Django on Python
anywhere you would go and reload your web server whatever this does is it
causes it to start up and listen on a server port so I have this thing
starting on 9,000 higher numbers are tend to be used for development lower
numbers like 80 or you over 443 are using for production and now I can go
and grab this URL localhost 9,000 and I can start a browser here's a little baby
browser now I'm gonna keep these up at the same time I'll come back okay let's
go back to my browser go back to this window and I'm gonna go to localhost
9,000 as a matter of fact before I do that I am going to turn on the web
developer tools and watch the network tab and now I'm gonna go to localhost
9,000 okay it's all clear oh wait a second all that stuff okay so what we
have here is we have a what something went wrong I don't know what went wrong
maybe it's doing a head request for all you know okay so I've played around too
long and something went wrong I'll figure that bug out later okay so now I
go over here and I hit ask for localhost 9,000 and it does a request you can see
it down here let's move this up a bit so I can see it better so it does a
request and the response is this HTML and I can see it in source code form or
I can see it in rendered form and I can look at the headers it sent these
headers in the request headers so the interesting thing is is you can see this
debug let's make this a little just a little bigger there we go this thing
just waits right oh let's go up to here it wait started the server and now
there's a process running on my computer that's hooked up to server 9,000 waiting
for something to happen I'll show you this code in a minute so it's just
debugging I wait for the next request I receive a get and that's the same as
this get there we go that's this get to slash it's an HTTP one one it's a get
request and then these are all of the headers that are being sent and if you
look down here request headers you see all of them every one of them cookie
pragma those are being sent to the web server the web servers receiving them on
a socket connection and then parsing that and so then it runs the code and
this router we'll talk about the router in a second it says oh I got a slash
path which is slash is there's nothing here after the 9,000 there's nothing
after the 9,000 there's slash path then it goes to the view and then it gets
back from the viewer response then it sends the response headers the only one
we're really changing is the fact that this is an HTML request and then it
sends 217 carries characters of the body output so this is the body output and
the web server sent 200 I'm guessing that's 217 characters and then it goes
back up and waits for the next request now it turns out the next request is
rapidly forthcoming and that's because it's requesting the favicon okay and
the favicon is it's trying to figure out what this icon is supposed to be so if
you look at like let's go back to this here you can see this DJ is a favicon
and the little octocat that's a favicon and it's trying to figure out what
favicon to put on localhost 9,000 but I don't have the capability to serve a
favicon so the favicon is a 404 not found so it's like hey I want a favicon
give me a favicon my browser is sending to my server give me the favicon and I
route the path to favicon and it blows up with a 404 and if you look at the
response you see the response is this 404 the risk let's look at the headers
look at the response headers we got a response status of 404 and we got that
it's an HTML page and those are the response headers but the 404 is the
thing that tells the browser that I don't I can't find this path that's the
path I've asked for and I can't get it and the browser is perfectly happy with
that and just doesn't put up a favicon for us okay so now what we're going to
do is we're gonna do another request and it tells us to add /djfree and now it's
still this keeps asking for the favicon wish it would stop but it doesn't maybe
I'll add favicon or maybe I'll have you add favicon support for it so we receive
the headers we've got a get for /djfree so if you look here let's go back to
this get request this is a get with a path of djfree and and then all the
headers of course and we have a valid route which you'll see this code in a
second for the routing it sends response headers it says this is a this is a text
slash plain so if we look at the response headers come back if we look at
the response headers this is text slash plain slash UTF-8 so this web server on
the left and the browser on the right are participating in a protocol and
again there's all kinds of rules about the protocol HTTP protocol we keep RFC
RFC stands for request for count okay this 72 31 so this protocol this
document right here tells us like let's go in this document search for get the
get request and the rules for what the get request looks like are here so let's
take a look the head I think the head is what when I when it blew up it was
sending a head request because I was sort of typing and it was trying to look
ahead yeah it might be that I have to check what the head is if it was a head
but let's let's keep looking for get look for an example get put put put so
again I'm already on page 26 it doesn't make any sense it's a mess we don't want
to learn how to do that but somebody had to know how to do it now I've been
working with some of this long enough that I wrote this code without having to
read this the the format of the headers everybody kind of knows and the format
of the body everybody kind of knows and so I I wrote this code which I'm going
to show you in a second that knows how to do this so let's get back and so the
body output it sent 13 characters of body output let's take a look at the
response the response is a plain text it's not HTML so it's not formatted
that's just that's why it's in courier format here and so let's go back and go
to let me clear this temporarily go to JS free now this returns neither it
returns a different status code it returns a 302 status code which is a
headers and so the 302 is the status code and that's called a redirect and
then it has this additional location header and so that location header says
go somewhere else okay I gotta go back where am I out here got to find so this
is where's JS free yeah okay so this is this is the JS free so it did a get
request for JS free boom routed all the right places route to this path of deep
JS for E in my views and then it sent a response header which says I'm gonna
send you a 302 and I'm gonna send this additional location that says go
immediately grab this and so the browser without what instantaneously went and
grabbed the the the DJ for E and retrieve that and that's what that found
so let's go back to the root again clear our our browser and now let's look at an
error so let's just go to a URL that is just junk and broken and like Django oh
what happened did I blow up my code oh I was typing too long well let's run it
again I address already in use you have to wait a little bit you got to wait
because the process was connected to the port and then the process died and tried
to close it but now it still can't get it sometimes it takes a few seconds to
get it back don't worry about address already in use don't worry about it there
we go we're back so now I gotta go and I gotta say missing and now we get a 404
we're sending up we got it we sent a 404 and this looks kind of like the Django
but the key thing here is it returns a header of a 404 which is I didn't know
how to route this path missing blah blah blah blah blah blah and Django does
kind of the same basic thing right and I put a dump of all this stuff just for
for yucks and then I have a broken view which I'll show you in a moment broken
and this has a this has a logic error in the Python and it blows up and the 500
error is the way that the server indicates to us that it did not get the
right kind of response from the router or the view okay so that is our widget
and let me take a look and show you some of the source code guess I'll make this
bigger now so again I am in my users CSF downloads mini Django main and it's got
the source code and so let's start with the simplest file and this is in a sense
kind of like if you're developing Django locally Python manage py run server if
you're developing in Python anywhere this is like the reload application
button and we have to start this this is a process that's going to listen on a
port and you do this by saying Python run server py you can switch to a
different port with a parameter and then if you're going to autograde this in
Django for everybody you got to turn on autograder support it adds a little
extra line in there for autograder support and and so you've got to add
this Python run server py 9000 autograder but if you look at this it's
sort of taken that first parameter for the port and it prints a print statement
and then it's imported mini Django okay and in mini Django there is a method
which we will see in a minute called HTTP server and that starts the server
and we pass into it the URLs URLs dot py we've imported URLs and that is our
URL writer router that is our URL router that is our URL router and so we're
gonna run the web server and then in the middle of that web server it's going to
route the URLs to our application so let's take a look at the web server the
mini Django itself you'll notice it's a hundred and seventy four lines okay so
in this we've got a couple of things we create some data classes which these are
just really lightweight objects we have a some just some data in here the method
which is get the path which is like slash DJ free the headers which is being
incoming headers that's going to be in a dictionary and then the body which is you
know if it was a post or whatever the response which is what we're supposed to
produce and send back we have an error code which is 200 okay normally we have
some response headers and then we have a response body and we make a little
method in here that basically is going to append to a list so we're accumulating
the lines which we will then send back to so these objects are the things that
views will work with the HTTP request response and etc so the first thing we
have to do is take the incoming request and and so the parsing of the request
has to do with what the headers look like what the body looks like and it's
pretty simple the headers are a bunch of key value pairs with this colon pattern
and it followed by a blank line followed by the body so the code splits splits
the the the incoming text that we've read from the from the input here parse
request the red input we break it into head and body and then we split the
header lines based on the rule and then we we send the headers back and we put
them in the object and then we return the HTTP request object response send
we'll come back to that here's a little patch autograder stuff here's the HTTP
server okay so what you see here is web servers have a thing where it makes a
socket that's like a file handle to the operating system that says we're going
to exchange network traffic it's going to connect it to local host on port 9000
and then we're going to have a listen this five is the queue so while you're
processing one the operating system if another one arrives in that moment the
it'll queue up five of them and after it gets five that you haven't processed yet
but then what it does is we're going to have a loop an infinite loop basically we
say waiting for the next response and then we say accept it and we get a socket
which is a readable bit of data like a file handle at that point one that you
can both read and write and then the address which we're not going to really
use so once we are it sits in this for a long time that's waiting for the next
request and then it reads up to 5,000 characters decodes it because it's UTF
8 coming from the internet and then gives us that in a big string and we
print the received headers which is just a string at this point and then we call
parse request which we just looked at which breaks it into headers turns the
headers into a dictionary and has the body figures out the method and figures
out the path and returns us an object of type HTTP request now remember that 500
error if we didn't get something a parse request I had that error happen if if we
don't have the request that we got back from parse request like a false or
something went wrong we're going to just go to the 500 error because that's the
view fail that says I couldn't parse it I'm gonna give up otherwise we got a
good request and so we're gonna take the router which is the first parameter to
HTTP server and that is a function and we're going to pass the request object
into the function and expect to get a response object back from the router now
if we're not getting a response object from the router then we're gonna blow up
with a 500 and this is what happens when you see the broken and we'll see that in
the view in a moment and now we got a response back and it's got all the
headers response headers it's got the response body and then we send her back
and then we shut down the socket and then we go back up and wait for the next
socket so it says waiting for next requests so it spends a lot of time
waiting then it gets some data reads it really quick processes it really quick
and then goes back and waits for the next request now if we take a look at
response send this is again doing the HTTP protocol we send the headers in the
right format then we send a blank line and then we then we go through and read
the body and send all that out and then we close it all out okay so that's
response send HTTP server response send and then the last thing we've got is
there's a view fail method and that's called for like a 404 or a 500 and it's
got the request in case we need to look at it we're dumping the request actually
and then a failure string which is kind of a you know that's just some debugging
additional clue as to what might have gone wrong we're printing now we're
logging this you'll notice that we always have this logging so we're seeing
all these print statements coming out to us that makes it easy for us to debug it
and you might even blow this code up once in a while and you get tracebacks in
here and so all this does is it prints out the page let's go back to the page
if you say missing you get a 404 not found and this is just Pat printing that
whole thing what the response code is the dumping it making it pretty and so
this is a way for you to debug when things are going badly and you can either
get a 404 error or if your view is broken you get a 500 error okay so now
let's take a look at is router okay so router is a parameter it is in the file
URLs and it's the as the function called router so let's take a look at the file
URLs and so this is similar to Python's Django URLs dot py and we get the print
statement routing to path right so that it has got the path out of the incoming
request if it's a slash we're gonna run a function out of views see it doesn't
import a views there's a function named root in views and if it starts with slash
DJ free we're gonna call the DJ very view if it's start if it's equal to JS
free we're gonna call that view and if it's slash broken we're gonna call the
broken view now if you look at Django's URLs dot py they put all this into an
array of tuples basically and in that array of tuples it's more complex than
this but I figured I would just make this a simple pattern of if LF LF LF just
because that's all that array is doing if we're gonna be very simple now if we
don't see one of these paths that our application knows about we drop into
this else and then that's where we send the 404 not found okay and so let's take
a look now at views dot py and this is a views and we're going to import many
Django and that's the HTTP request and response that is these two data classes
oops which are really kind of very lightweight objects so lightweight
syntax to build objects quickly and so the parameter to our view is an HTTP
request because the framework has built an HTTP request and has passed it to us
right and we are expected so if you haven't been if you've been newbie to
Python or been doing Python a long time this is Python type extensions I think
it came into Python 3.5 the parameter name is request colon and then the type
name this is the expected type and then the return name that's just says that
when we return from this function we're supposed to send back an HTTP response
so you could do this without this sort of syntactic fluff but boy it sure helps
for me to talk to you about what the parameter and return value are supposed
to be because that's what that line is really saying okay so our contract is
we're supposed to return an HTTP response and again that's an object defined by
the framework so we're going to create one we're going to set the headers the
headers are just a dictionary so they're key value pair and we're going to tell
it the content type and again you can go look up what content type is in the
documentation and then we do a series of writes and at this point in the response
object if you go back and look at it that's accumulating a list of strings and
we're not actually sending the data at this moment we are accumulating a list
of strings and then we were stern we have constructed and filled up this
response object and we send it back okay and so if you go in here it's also being
returned back up through URLs dot py back up into where's the router come back
there we go the router is URLs dot py we are getting back an HTTP response we're
checking to see if it's a good one if it's not good we send a 500 if it is
good we actually I should make that be okay okay so I think I got to put a
little extra line code in here so by the time you're looking at it I think this
is supposed to yeah I'll put some code in here okay so then we send that
response back so we're here in the views we are returning the response it works
its way back up through the URLs back into the Django itself we get the
response and then we send it back to the browser we're almost done so we have a
series this is our application code right the URLs is just kind of to get us
where we want the DJ free is sending back a single line of text the JS free
is sending a redirect and so we're telling it to send a code of 302 that's
called a temporary redirect and we're adding a header called the location
which is where we want to redirect to so we return this it goes to the browser
and the browser immediately comes back and comes back to this DJ free and
that's what you see when you go to slash J here let me hide this boom that's what
you see when you go to JS for eat so first you see a 302 which sends back a
location to DJ free and then the browser in a blink of an eye without doing
without waiting for you does a get request to DJ free because that's what
it was told to do so you return this goes all the way back to the browser the
browser sees the 302 redirect sees the location and then comes back in and
reads this code and that's how that works the only remaining view is the
broken and in this it it's not going to return an HTTP response all these other
ones make HTTP responses and return them this is just returning a string by
mistake it turns out I think in Django you can return a string and it kind of
makes an HTTP request for you but I was more interested in causing a 500 or
return a string the path returns that to the framework the framework receives a
string as the response and then it's not an HTTP response so we get a 500 error
and so if I go to slash broken let me clear this boom I get a 500 error so the
500 error not only is a 500 error but there is a response involved in there right and
so there's some HTML that comes back with all that stuff and so there we go
I'm sure you have questions but you can look at all this code and you can figure
it all out and enjoy it so again this is about the mini Django web server like
the smallest approximately Django web server that I could build so that you
can read and even play with it put print statements in and again this is part of
my Django for everybody class Cheers